Chapter 6 - Selection, the Impersonal Engineer


In this chapter things get slightly out of hand. You may regret this, but you will soon notice that it is a good idea to give chance a chance in the further creation of new brands of vehicles. This will make available a source of intelligence that is much more powerful than any engineering mind.

Out of the collection of vehicles that we have produced for the purposes of our experimentation, we will choose some of the more complicated specimens and put them onto a large table. Of course there will also be some sources of light, sound, smell, and so forth on the table, some of them fixed and some of them moving. And there will be various shapes or landmarks, including the cliff that signals the end of the table top.

Now you and I will gather a plentiful supply of materials (tin, plastic, threshold devices, wheels, motors, sensors, wires, screws and bolts) and proceed to build vehicles, taking as our models vehicles that we pick from the ones circulating on the table. Each time we copy a vehicle, we will put both the model and its copy back on the table, pick up another vehicle, copy it, and so on. Of course we will not pick up vehicles that have fallen on the floor because they have proved their own inability to cope with the environment. We will be careful to produce vehicles at a pace that roughly matches the rate at which vehicles fall off the table, to prevent the race from dying out, on one hand, and to prevent the table from becoming unduly crowded, on the other.

Note that while we are playing this game, we won't have time to test the behavior or to study the wiring, let alone to understand the logic of the vehicles that we pick up as models for copying. Nor should we. All we are asked to do is to slavishly connect the parts according to the pattern in the model.

Note also that when we do this in a hurry, we are bound to make occasional mistakes. It may be our fault when our copy of a perfectly well-tested vehicle falls off the table as soon as we put it down. But it is also possible that we will unwittingly introduce a particularly shrewd variation into the pattern of connections, so that our copy will survive forever while the original may turn out to be unfit for survival after all.

It does seem surprising that errors arising in the sloppy execution of a task should act as germs for improvement. What is less astonishing is the creative power of a special sort of error consisting of new combinations of partial mechanisms, each of which is not disrupted in its own well-tested structure. This can easily happen when we pick up one vehicle as a model for one part of the brain and then by mistake pick up another vehicle as a model for another part of the brain. Such errors have a much greater chance of transcending the intelligence of the original plan.

This is an important point. If the lucky accidents live on forever, they will also have a multitude of descendants, for they will stay on the table all the time while the less lucky ones come and go. Therefore, they have a much greater chance of being picked up by the copyists as models for the next generation. Thus very good ideas unwittingly introduced into the wiring, though improbable, do become quite widespread in the long run.

This story is quite old and goes by the name of Darwinian evolution. Many people don't like the idea that everything beautiful and marvelous in organic nature should be due to the simple cooperation of reproduction, errors, and selection. This is no problem for us. We have convinced ourselves that beautiful, marvelous, and shrewd machines can be made out of inorganic matter by this simple trick. Moreover, we already know that analysis is much more difficult than synthesis. Where there has been no conscious engineering at all, as in the case of our type 6 vehicles, analysis will necessarily produce the feeling of a mysterious supernatural hand guiding the creation. We can imagine that in most cases our analysis of brains in type 6 vehicles would fail altogether: the wiring that produces their behavior may be so complicated and involved that we will never be able to isolate a simple scheme. And yet it works.

